Sketching out some ideas that will be fleshed out into a system that for performing generation forecasting for renewable energy sources.

The concept is simple.  One of the current objectons to distributed, small scale energy production is that the inherent intermittent and unreliable nature of it means that its existence can not be factored in to decisions about capital expenses for production capacity, or decisions about production decisions or production capacity. This is in conflict with the growth in technologies that make local power production more practical, from small scale horizontal or vertical axis wind turbine installations, to traditional solar panels, to solar panel roofing, to more cutting edge ideas such as interweaving common household items, such as draperies, exterior wall materials, or tinted windows that generate electricty as light passes through them, are becoming more affordable and more available.

An individual's solar, wind, or even hydro power contributions to the grid may reduce on demand fuel costs incurred by the generating utility's instant demand production systems, but utilities assert that these production capacities can not be factored into any larger decisions about the amount of power producrement, either by capital facilities owned by the utility, or by agreements to buy another facility's power, that the facility must expend it's treasure on.

This assertion appears to be rooted in a solveable problem. If a utility could, with knowledge of a small scale provider's installation type and rated max capacity, produce reliable near and long term estimates of power generation that factor in weather patterns as well as solar radiation patterns, if this system could learn over time so that the longer a provider's capacity was in place, the better the estimates were, and if this system could scale from a small number of installations to commercial scales, a major barrier to the deployment of small scale, widely distributed energy production for electrical grids worldwide could be eliminated.

This project appears to have a few components which have to be tied together.

At the bottom level, there is a need for some renewable energy installations to which some sort of metering and recording system is attached in order to generate reliable data points that can be used when developing and testing the prediction models.

Data sources need to be secured. These should include information on solar insolation and average daylight hours for locations across the US. In addition, information about average wind patterns for different regions across the US, and weather forecast data are required.

Given those data sources, an algorithmic process, likely involving one or more artificial intelligence processes and/or statistic/mathematical modeling processes, can be developed to predict energy output from small, distributed generators that, even in the face of the inherently unreliable nature of individual small emplacements, should be accurate in aggregate. While the probability of one or more out of N distributed generators failing to produce the power predicted by the algorithm may be high, the probabilty of enough of them failing at the same time that it causes a statistically significant deviation from the output predicted by the algorithm should be vanishingly small.

Even while experimental data is being gathered, which will later be used to experimentally verify the algorithm's ability to successfully predict energy outputs, the aforementioned data sources can be used to create a simulation of many metered, distributed generators, and this data can, in turn, be used to help with the initial development and testing of the prediction algorithm.

----

Additional Supporting Information


Power utilities often assert, in combination with the objections noted earlier, that they do not encourage small scale distributed power generation because it is ultimately more expensive for the consumer than large scale, centralized distribution. A detailed analysis would need to be done to fact check the veracity of this claim, but at the surface, it appears to be false.

A 250 watt solar panel that retails, at current May 2014 US prices, for $270, with a warranted production capacity of it's rated power (250 watts) for 25 years, will, depending on where it is installed, pay for itself in less than five years of operation. The remaining 20 years of it's warranted lifespan reflect a return on the initial investment.

Using some quick numbers, if a 250 watt panel, taken over the course of an entire year, and factoring in days of reduced capacity because of inclememt weather, only produces an average of 2000 watts a day, and assuming that the final installation of that 250 watt panel, which today can be readily purchased at retail prices of approximately $270, might double the purchase price, leading to a final installed cost of $540 per 250 watts of production capacity, the up-front cost of the installation, distributed over the life of it's production capacity, works out to less than $0.03 per kilowatt hour of electrical generation. Even allowing for ongoing costs for maintenance and facilities expenses, there is substantial room for additional costs before the expense becomes significantly greater than that of centralized power generation.

In addition, while centralized power generation requires massively expensive high tension power lines to provide long distance transportation for the generated power, widely distrubed power generated would result in most power being consumed in the region where it was produced. This should help to reduce overall long term infrastructure costs if wide scale distrubted power generation were to become a reality.

-----

Areas of research

Documenting supporting information regarding the applicability of the problem
(such as http://www.wyrulec.com/Generation/overview.cfm)

Figuring out how to get experimental data to use (i.e. if we have to build some small scale items to test with, how do we collect data automatically).

Data sources

Building a simulation, and using that to generate data points to use for the initial algorithm creation.

Figuring out the math and techniques to use to be able to use the data in a predictive model.

Learning programming so that all this can be tied together.
